[Music]
good morning
welcome to breakfast with john walker
and louise minchin the headline is for
you at six o'clock this morning vaccine
hope for millions the rollout of the
oxford astrazeneca jab begins today
it's described as a pivotal moment in
the uk's fight against coronavirus
primary schools in most of england
reopened this morning but there's
growing concern over safety and staff
shortages
we are live at a primary school in
wiltshire that will be welcoming
children back today but at the start of
a new term
and a new year and a massive divisive
argument about whether or not school
should reopen
it all feels very 20 20 doesn't it
labor calls for an immediate england
wide lockdown as boris johnson warns of
tighter coronavirus restrictions
i just want to find 11 780 votes
a recording submerged of president trump
telling officials to find votes to
overturn
joe biden's election win a new way of
doing business good morning the uk's
transition agreement with the eu
has ended companies and consumers start
the new year working out what it means
for them
i'll take you through it good morning
from professional rugby to world darts
champion
gerwyn price beats gary anderson to take
the pdc title he says it's a dream come
true
good morning for most of us today it is
going to be cold
but sunny there are still some wintry
showers so in the east
some rain across the southeast and gusty
winds to boot but i'll have all the
details
in 10 minutes
[Music]
good morning it's monday it's the 4th of
january top story for you this morning
the first doses of the coronavirus
vaccine developed by oxford university
will be given to patients today just
five days after it was approved
the health secretary matt hancock says
it's a pivotal
moment in the pandemic as covid cases
continue to surge
more than half a million doses of the
jab are ready to roll out
our health correspondent anna collinson
has more
to many the oxford astrazeneca vaccine
is seen as a game changer in the fight
against the coronavirus
it's cheaper than the fisa buy-in tech
jab and it doesn't require super cold
storage
which makes it easier to transport
particularly to those living in care
homes
the uk has ordered 100 million oxford
astrazeneca doses
from today more than 500 000 will be
delivered at a small group of hospitals
before expanding to a thousand centres
by the end of the week
a million people have already received
the fisa vaccine
but there are 30 million more in the
priority groups
including frontline health workers and
adults aged over 50.
rapid delivery is vital so as part of
its biggest homeland operation in
peacetime
members of the armed forces will help
with the rollout
the prime minister says tens of millions
will be vaccinated in the next three
months
for our country we can see how we're
going to get out of this with great
clarity now we can see how the vaccines
can
really really help us there will be a
12-week
wait for the second dose despite
concerns from some scientists
the government's top advisors insist
this approach will ensure more people
are protected faster with hospitals
under extreme pressure
during their toughest month of the year
the race is now on
between a more contagious variant of the
virus
and the uk's two vaccines anna collinson
bbc news so primary schools in many
parts of england will reopen today
despite
teaching unions and some councils asking
the government to keep them closed to
try and limit the spread of the virus
breakfast john mcguire is at king's
lodge primary school in wheelchair for
us this morning where children
are going to go back uh morning to you
john what can you tell us from there
yeah molly louise this is one of the
reception classrooms here at the school
around 330 pupils here
on the school register and it is
reopening for the new term
for the new year as from today the
school has been open ever since the
beginning of june kim spencer
is the head teacher good morning to you
to reopen today was that a difficult
decision
i think for us it wasn't a difficult
decision once we'd considered all of the
risks
we've been thinking about risk
assessment right since the start of the
pandemic
and we've followed the process we've
looked at the risk assessment again over
the christmas holidays we've talked to
colleagues across the town
and i think we're all making decisions
with the information that we have
currently
and does it feel different to the sort
of decisions you made when you reopened
after the first lockdown at the
beginning of the summer i think they're
almost identical
back in the summer we were concerned
about something that was very new to us
this time what we're most concerned
about is the increased
spread in other areas of the country so
we're looking
more in detail again about what we can
do in school
how we can keep the children safe and of
course how we can keep the staff safe
and it's it's a decision made by you and
by the governors and we'll talk to some
governors later on this morning but
you also want to assume include the
parents in that decision making as well
to a certain extent
our parents speak with their feet really
and today
we just like other schools in the
country we will have parents who have
made the decision not to send their
children into school for their own
reasons
and my job is to try and encourage
people to send their children into
school
because we can see the difference that
it makes by being here
but i also have to reckon you know
recognize the fact that parents are
apprehensive too
all right kim spencer thank you very
much indeed such a difficult decision to
make
once again whether to open a school or
not just as it was
so many months ago but so many
conditions are again
different aren't they which is why we're
seeing so many different decisions made
by different organizations different
levels but this school here
in chippenham will be open for pupils
today well listen john uh thank you very
much
indeed so many people are waking up this
morning wondering about what's going on
we'll be speaking actually as well
hopper seven here to the health
secretary
matt hancock about that other things of
course as well
uh the labor leader sakir stam has urged
the prime minister to call a national
lockdown today
he was speaking after boris johnson said
stronger regional restrictions
may be required over the coming weeks
nearly 55 000 covid cases were reported
yesterday
our political correspondent chris mason
has details
the nhs struggling the economy crippled
the country stalked by uncertainty
few deny the situation is bleak and is
likely to remain so
for the remainder of the winter the next
step would probably be
for more areas of england to move into
tier 4 the highest level of restrictions
if the coronavirus numbers in those
regions in lower tiers
go in the wrong direction i'm told some
sort of curfew being imposed in england
is not being looked at but little
is being categorically ruled out labour
want action now the virus is clearly out
of
control and uh there's no good the prime
minister hinting that further
restrictions are coming
to place in a week or two or three that
delay has been the source of so many
problems
so i say bringing those restrictions now
national restrictions within the next 24
hours that has to be the first step
to controlling the virus sakia wants a
renewed emphasis on the stay
at home message government sources say
this is very similar to existing tier
four restrictions
chris mason bbc news new corona virus
restrictions are expected to be
announced in scotland today the scottish
parliament's being recalled for an
urgent statement by the first minister
nicolas sturgeon this afternoon
before that she'll meet her cabinet and
options likely to be discussed include
a further delay to pupils returning to
school and returned to the stay-at-home
message which dominated
the early days of the first lockdown
five teenagers are being held by police
in connection with the fatal stabbing of
a 13 year old boy in reading yesterday
afternoon
four boys and a girl all aged between 13
and 14 have been arrested on suspicion
of conspiracy to commit murder
thames valley police are appealing four
witnesses
a coroner has ruled that nora quarin who
died during a family holiday in malaysia
was not killed by any criminal
negligence
nora who is 15 was staying in a rain
forest resort when she went missing from
her chalet in august 2019. her body was
found beside a stream just over a mile
away
following a 10-day search an inquest in
malaysia ruled that norah's death was
caused by
misadventure a recording has emerged
which appears to show
president trump putting pressure on a
senior republican official to overturn
joe biden's election victory in
georgia the washington post says the
audio is from an hour-long phone call
with georgia's secretary of state
but brad raffensberger the vice
president-elect
kamala harris called it a bold abuse of
power paul hawkins reports
impeachment the russia scandal and
catching kovid in the middle of a
pandemic
the trump presidency has been a roller
coaster ride so on one level
perhaps we shouldn't be surprised after
all donald trump himself said losing is
never easy
not for me it's not but on another level
no one could have foreseen that the
president of the united states
would ask georgia's top election
official to find enough votes to
overturn november's results
you can't let it happen and you are
letting it happen all you know i mean
i'm notifying you that you're letting it
happen
so look all i want to do is this i just
want to find
uh 11 thousand seven
hundred and eighty votes which is one
more that we have
because we won the state the call
lasted an hour a lawyer for the state
refuting the president's
unsubstantiated claim that ballots had
been shredded and voting machinery had
been removed
condemnation of the call has been swift
well it was yes certainly the voice of
desperation
and it was a bald bald-faced
bold abuse of power
but 11 republican senators led by ted
cruz are still planning to challenge the
election result when it's officially
certified on wednesday
donald trump is holding an election
rally on monday night in georgia where
two republican held senate seats are up
for grabs in tuesday's election
polling suggests both races are tight
with the outcome deciding who controls
the upper house of congress
but with donald trump questioning the
voting process in georgia
will republicans still turn out to vote
paul hawkins
bbc news
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app
and get the full story with bbc dot co
dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest
with bbc news